---
layout: post
title: "C++ Notes - 1"
date: 2016-07-09 00:19:30 +0700
categories: c++
tags: c++ programming notes
---

I'm starting to review my C++ programming knowledge. It's more precise to say that I'm learning C++ again. Honestly this is first for better serving the job at the company I'm going to start next month, but more importantly, it's a skill that I need to master anyway. 

So this post will list out some important points that I think I need to remember about C++. I took all these notes from the book "**A Tour of C++**" by Bjarne Stroustrup (father of the C++ programming language). This post will be updated as I read through this book. 

### General

- C++ is a compiled language
- Before a program can be run, the following process happens:

    **Source file**  --- *compiler* ---> **Object file**  --- *linker* ---> **Executable file**
    
- If the program has multiple source files, each object file produced by the compiler must be combined by the linker to create the final executable file.
- An executable program is not portable, but the source file is
- C++ is a statically typed language, this means the type of any entity (variable, function, object, ...) must be known to the compiler at its point of use

### Function

- A function must be declared before called
- Multiple functions can have same name, but must have different signatures (signature of a function is its number of arguments and their types). This is called **function overloading**. Eg:
    - void print(double) {}
    - void print(int) {}
    - void print(string) {}
    
- When calling overloaded functions, compiler will choose the most appropriate one (based on its signature)
- For better code maintainability, break the program into multiple small functions which each will perform a specific task

### Types, Operators and Variables

- C++ fundamental data types:
    - `bool`: boolean type, possible values are `true` and `false`
    - `int`: integer value, e.g.: 1, 2, 3, 123, -1000, ...
    - `char`: character, e.g.: 'a', 'Z', '8', ...
    - `double`: double-precision floating point number, e.g.: 123.456, -100.25, 30.50
    - `unsigned`: non-negative integer, e.g.: 0, 1, 999
- Size of each fundamental data type:
    - `bool`: 1 byte
    - `char`: 1 byte
    - `int`: 4 bytes
    - `double`: 4 bytes
- Note that **the size of a type is implementation-defined**, that means their sizes may vary among different machines. The best way to get the correct size is by using `sizeof()` function: `sizeof(char)`, `sizeof(int)`, ...
- Arithmetic operators:
    - `x + y`   // plus 
    - `x - y`   // minus
    - `x * y`   // multiplication
    - `x / y`   // division
    - `x % y`   // modulo, gets remainder
    - `+x`     // unary plus
    - `-x`     // unary minus
    - `x += y`  // shorthand for `x = x + y`, this can be applied for other operators: *, /, -, ...
- Comparision operators:
    - `x == y`  // equal
    - `x != y`  // not equal
    - `x > y`   // greater than
    - `x >= y`  // greater than or equal to
    - `x < y`   // less than
    - `x <= y`  // less than or equal to    
- Bitwise operators (perform operations on bit level):
    - `x & y`     // bitwise AND
    - `x | y`     // bitwise OR
    - `x ^ y`     // bitwise EXCLUSIVE OR
    - `~x`        // bitwise COMPLEMENT 
- Logical operators (returns `true` or `false`)
    - `x && y`    // logical AND
    - `x || y`    // logical OR
- There are 2 ways to assign a value to a variable:
    - `int x = 1`
    - `int x {1}`
- `=` assignment operator automatically do type conversion, `{}` does not, this is performed by C++ implicitly
    - `int x = 3.4` // `x` becomes 3
    - `int x {3.4`  // error: floating-point to integer conversion
- Using `auto` to create a varialbe without mentioning its type, but this should be limited, especially in large code
    - `auto b = true`   // a boolean
    - `auto d = 3.14`   // a double
    - `auto c = 'h'`    // a char
    
### Scope & Lifetime

An object in C++ can have one of 3 types of scope:

- **Local scope**: A name declared in a function or `lambda` is called a local name. Its scope extends from its point of declaration to the end of the block in which its declaration occurs. A *block* is delimited by a `{ }` pair. Function argument names are considered local names.
- **Class scope**: A name is called a *member name* (or a *class member name*) if it is defined in a
class, outside any function, `lambda`, or `enum` class. Its scope extends from the opening { of its enclosing declaration to the end of that declaration.
- **Namespace scope**: A name is called a *namespace member name* if it is defined in a namespace outside any function, `lambda`, `class`, or `enum` class. Its scope extends from the point of declaration to the end of its namespace. 
- An object must be constructed (initialized) before it is used and will be destroyed at the end of its scope. 
    - For a namespace object, the point of its destruction is the end of the program.
    - For a member, the point of destruction is determined by the point of destruction of the object of which it is a member. 
    - An object created by `new` ‘‘lives’’ until destroyed by `delete`
    
### Constants

### Pointers, Arrays and References

